---
layout: the-science-of-your-cycle
title:  "Day 7: The REAL Cause of Period Problems (And How to Fix Them)"
date:   2016-05-31
author: "Jennifer Aldoretta"
permalink: /the-science-of-your-cycle/day-07/
img: courses/the-science-of-your-cycle-day-07.png
excerpt: "Welcome to the 7th and final day of &ldquo;The Science of Your Cycle&rdquo;! Most of us are taught that period problems &mdash; like pain, acne, low libido, mood swings, a heavy flow, irregular cycles, fatigue, etc. &mdash; are something we just have to deal with. But what if we told you that you CAN feel amazing all month long? In this last video, you&rsquo;ll learn all about the REAL cause of most period problems and what you can start doing TODAY to improve any negative symptoms you experience."
---


Welcome to the 7th and final day of <strong>The Science of Your Cycle</strong>, Groove's amazing (and 100 percent FREE) 7-day mini-course that will teach you everything you need to know about how your body (and your period) works. Most of us are taught that period problems &mdash; like pain, acne, low libido, mood swings, a heavy flow, irregular cycles, fatigue, etc. &mdash; are something we just have to deal with. But what if we told you that you CAN feel amazing all month long? Our lovely CEO, Jennifer Aldoretta, is living proof that it&rsquo;s possible! In this last video, you&rsquo;ll learn all about the REAL cause of most period problems and what you can start doing TODAY to improve any negative symptoms you experience. 

<div class="center" itemprop="video" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/VideoObject">
  <iframe class="video" width="700" height="394" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/uF8SSGqZx-Q?rel=0&amp;showinfo=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  <meta itemprop="name" content="Green Your Period: Menstrual Cup Show & Tell (DivaCup & Me Luna)" />
  <meta itemprop="description" content="The Green Your Period video series is all about why sustainable and eco-friendly period products are great for your health and the environment." />
</div>

## Resources ##
1. <p><a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Sign up for Period Reset</a> and heal your period problems FOR GOOD.</p>
2. <p><a class="text-link" href="http://www.readytogroove.com" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'App download - SoYC'});">Download Groove</a> to start tracking and benefiting from your menstrual cycle data.</p>
3. <p><a class="text-link" href="http://www.readytogroove.com/the-cycle/chapter-7-the-rules-of-the-sympto-thermal-method/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'STM rules - SoYC'});">Learn the rules</a> that MUST be followed to prevent pregnancy using your menstrual cycle data.</p>
4. <p><a class="text-link" target="_blank" href="/download/The-Science-of-Your-Cycle-Day-07.pdf" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'SoYC - Day 7 slides'});">Download today's slides.</a></p>
5. <p><a class="text-link" href="/start-here">Sign up for <strong>The SCIENCE of Your Cycle</strong></a></p>

Did you LOVE this 7-day course?! Leave a comment &mdash; we want to hear your thoughts!

### Video Transcript ###

<strong>00:00 -</strong> Welcome everyone to the last, final, 7th day of <strong>The SCIENCE of Your Cycle</strong> course brought to you by Groove. This last day, we're going to be learning a lot of really really beneficial information. We're going to learn the REAL cause of any period problems you might be experiencing and how to fix them. I'm so excited to jump in. Today's goals are going to be to learn the real cause of most period problems, to use what we've learned throughout the last 6 days to gain an understanding of why period problems develop in the first place, and then lastly we're going to find out what steps you can start taking in your life right now to help you fix the underlying cause of your period problems. 

<strong>00:54 -</strong> Before we get started I want you to take a gander at this list and tell me if you experience any of these things. Do you struggle with constipation, diarrhea, IBS, gas, bloating, food cravings? Acne, dry skin, oily skin, rashes, eczema, psoriasis? Painful, irregular, absent, or heavy periods? Spotting, clotted menstrual flow, or long periods? PMS, PMDD, endometriosis, fibroids PCOS? Hot flashes, low libido, headaches, urinary tract infections, fatigue, hair loss, weight gain, mood swings, irritability, anxiety, depression? Brain fog, insomnia, night sweats, difficulty sleeping? I know that is a crazy long list, but if you struggle with any of those things, listen up! Cuz this is for you. 

<strong>01:56 -</strong> Problems equal hormone imbalance! I can't say it enough: period problems equals hormone imbalance! If you're struggling with period problems, then you're struggling with hormonal imbalance. But the good news is that your body WANTS to heal itself. Healing is what your body does best! Think about it: if you scrape your knee, your body is like “No problem! I've got your back!” If you break a bone, give it a few months, but your body is like “I got this!” And if you have the flu, your body is like “Immune system to the rescue!” Your periods are no different than that. Hormonal imbalance and period problems CAN be fixed &mdash; I'm living proof. There's so many others out there who are also living proof. Hormonal imbalance and period problems can be fixed, and your body wants to heal them. 

<strong>02:56 -</strong> Here's why hormonal imbalance means trouble. Hormones are the body's chemical messengers. They are responsible for most of the things that happen in your body &mdash; like appetite, sleep, thirst, digestion, tiredness, body temperature, reproduction, stress, the stress responses that you have, and even happiness. All of those things are affected by hormones. Your body reacts differently to different levels of each hormone in your body, so that means that your body needs a certain amount of each hormone in order to function normally. Improper hormone amounts is going to lead to improper function of various systems in your body. 

<strong>03:56 -</strong> Here are some causes of hormonal imbalance and causes of period problems. All those period  problems and abnormal period symptoms that we learned about yesterday: here are some of the causes. We're going to go into these in more detail in the coming slides. These things can occur together or individually, but they almost always cause issues with your period. Here they are: the inability to flush excess hormones, chemical exposure, poor digestive health, nutrient deficiencies, and environmental stress. 

<strong>04:33 -</strong> First, we're going to talk about the inability to flush excess hormones. Your body is constantly producing hormones, but it doesn't need all of the hormones that it produces...only certain levels. But it produces extra, so that it can take what it needs. Anything that it doesn't need, the body is going to eliminate. By eliminate, that's right I mean taking a number two! Your body gets rid of excess hormones by pooping and peeing them out, and if you're pooping too frequently or not frequently enough, this can cause some serious issues with your hormone levels. 

<strong>05:15 -</strong> Chemical exposure: chemicals don't have to be ultra toxic to be dangerous for your health. There are chemicals in literally everything that we come in contact with: personal hygiene products, cleaning supplies, and many more! Many of these chemicals have actually been shown and studies to mimic the body's natural hormones. And because they mimic the body's natural hormones, this can lead to your body having improper hormone levels, because it's either not making enough hormones, because it thinks it already has them because of those unnatural chemicals. 

<strong>06:04 -</strong> Number 3: poor digestive health. A healthy gut is literally one of the most important parts of being healthy, and I cannot stress that enough. A healthy gut is so so important. An unhealthy gut can be caused by things like taking antibiotics, being formula-fed as a baby (yes, the problem goes all the way back to when you were a baby, believe it or not), being born via cesarean section (or C-section) and not getting all of those beneficial bacteria that your mother is supposed to pass on to the baby in the birth canal, food allergies, use of antibacterial products, and even eating certain foods can all create an environment for an unhealthy gut. If you have period problems or any symptoms throughout your cycle, your gut is likely a big part of the problem. 

<strong>07:05 -</strong> Number 4: nutrient deficiencies. Hippocrates said, “Let food be thy medicine and medicine be thy food,” and that could not be more accurate. Your body needs the right nutrients for optimal health &mdash; and the right nutrients in the right amounts for optimal health. Proper nutrient intake can affect your body's ability to make many of the hormones that are vital for the functions that it carries out on a day-to-day basis. Many of the things, unfortunately, that we think are healthy (or that we’re told are healthy) are actually completely void of many of the nutrients the body needs. So many of us are deficient in many nutrients that are very important for healthy function. 

<strong>07:54 -</strong> Number 5: environmental stress. Remember that the body is a system of systems? Stress interferes with the body's ability to function optimally, and that stress can be anything from physical stress (like too much exercise), to environmental stress (like being sick or not sleeping enough), to mental and emotional stress (like being really stressed because of a situation at home or in a relationship, or having a lot going on at work). All of those things that can stress your body out, and when your body is producing lots and lots of stress hormones, that can actually hinder the production of other hormones that your body needs to make. So it makes your body incapable of producing hormones that it really needs. 

<strong>08:46 -</strong> Now that you know what causes hormonal imbalance, I'm sure you're dying to know how can you actually FIX this. It may feel hopeless, but it's not hopeless. You can actually fix many of the issues that cause hormonal imbalance and period problems. Here is a short list of the things that you need to do to fix hormonal imbalance: improve and support your gut health (because, like I said, healthy gut equals healthy body), take the right supplements (not all supplements are created equal, not all supplements are even useful, and not all supplements actually do anything), get better sleep, eat the right foods for your body, get enough nutrients, reduce your chemical exposure, do the types of exercises that support healthy hormones (yes, there are certain ones that are better than others), work to overcome stress (to help your body bring down the stress hormones so it has resources for other hormones). 

<strong>10:05 -</strong> That all probably seems WAY easier said than done. It's really easy to list out what you need to do, but implementing things is another story. Luckily, there's a silver lining: fixing period problems is MUCH easier than you think. And it can actually be done without medication, without the birth control pill, without hormonal contraception. One of the best things is that you don't have to do it alone. I've been there &mdash; I know exactly how difficult it is. I know how isolating it can feel, and I know how frustrating it can feel to feel like you've tried a ton of things and nothing is working. 

<strong>10:57 -</strong> I've been there, but I want to tell you that healthy periods are within reach! For me, I spent years reading medical journals, reading studies, and reading all the science I could get my hands on, and then using that information to perform experiments on myself &mdash; all because I was so desperate to find something that balanced my hormones and fixed my periods. I was so tired of relying on the pill or relying on pain medication, and I was just tired of it. I didn't feel healthy, so I took matters into my own hands. I've managed to completely eliminate more than a decade of period problems &mdash; completely eliminate. I feel fantastic all month long, and my life has literally been transformed. I can't even tell you how wonderful it's been. And I want you to feel as amazing as I feel now. Looking back, I wonder “How the hell did I function?!” I have no idea how I functioned! I was in so much pain during my periods. I was constipated non-stop. My moods were out of control. I had skin problems. I had digestive problems. I was a hot mess. But I've managed to completely eliminate those problems, and I've been symptom-free for 6 months now, which is wonderful. It's a great feeling! Unfortunately, I healed my period problems alone, but you shouldn't have to do that. I wish somebody was there to help me &mdash; I didn't have that support, and I wish that I had had that support. I want you to have that support, and that is the exact reason why I created <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a>, which is Groove’s 30-day program that is meant to help you heal your hormonal imbalance for good. Not just for a little while, not just for a day, not just for one period...for good. This program came out of my years of research and self-experiments, and really just learning everything that I could and finding the best science to support fixing my body. 

<strong>13:36 -</strong> Here’s what <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/">Period Reset</a> offers. <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a> offers detailed articles that explain the science behind period problems, and how to fix those problems (also using science &mdash; science is awesome). <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a> has easy-to-implement tips to help you heal your gut, eliminate nutrient deficiencies, sleep better, clear up your acne, overcome stress, and balance your hormones. There are so many things that you would never even think have an effect on your health that have a huge effect on it, and <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a> can teach you all about it. <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a> also contains trusted supplement and product recommendations. I personally vetted different supplements and products to recommend the best ones &mdash; supplements that are independently tested, supplements that are tested for purity, and supplements that have been shown in studies to have positive effects. It also has a lifetime access. You get all of the above information, and you’ll get access to our private Facebook group that offers you support and allows you to ask questions. 

<strong>15:06 -</strong> I want you to know that fixing hormonal imbalance and fixing period problems it's hard work, but <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a> gives you all of the tools that you need. And I can tell you from personal experience that there is truly nothing better &mdash; there's no better feeling in the world &mdash; than feeling amazing and healthy all month long. I can't tell you how transformative that's been for me, and I'm super passionate about bringing that to you because I know how difficult it is. I really. 

<strong>15:45 -</strong> The jam-packed <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a> program is only $29 (the value is far above $45, and we originally thought about charging that), but I want to give it to you for $29. $29 is a pretty reasonable price, and not only does that include all of the stuff that you just learned about, but it also comes with a money-back guarantee. If you don't love it, let us know and we will refund you...no big deal! We're THAT confident that you'll be pleased with everything that it'll teach you. 

<strong>16:36 -</strong> I agree, adorably surprised dog, we're practically giving <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a> away! We're doing that on purpose because we want it to be accessible. We want you to feel like you can afford it because this information is life-changing. I want you to feel good, I really, really do. 

<strong>17:04 -</strong> That’s the end of <strong>The SCIENCE of Your Cycle</strong>! This is the 7th and final day! I'm so so thrilled that you took this journey with me. I hope you learned a ton. I hope you feel like Queen Bey from that earlier gif. I hope you feel fabulous and confident and amazing, and I hope that you'll go <a class="text-link" href="http://www.readytogroove.com" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'App download - SoYC'});">download the Groove app</a> to apply all of that information and start learning about your body more. And if you're interested in using <a class="text-link" href="https://periodreset.readytogroove.com/" onClick="ga('send', 'event', { eventCategory: 'Link', eventAction: 'Click', eventLabel: 'Period Reset - SoYC'});">Period Reset</a> and learning how to heal your periods, then click on the link below the video because you deserve it! You deserve to feel good. You deserve to feel healthy, and I want to help you get there. So check it out! Thanks so much for taking this ride with me. It was amazing, and I am officially dubbing you period professional. Go brag to your friends about it.