---
layout: book-content
title:  "Chapter 6: Hormone Changes &amp; Fertility Signals"
date:   2014-01-12
category: book
---

In order to understand the rules of the sympto-thermal method (STM) and to properly and effectively practice them, it is absolutely essential that you first gain a thorough understanding of the information presented in this chapter. In Chapter 5, I discussed the hormonal changes that work together to produce the menstrual cycle. These hormonal fluctuations have both an unseen and an observable effect on the female body, and this chapter will focus on how those changes manifest in an obvious and useful way. A woman's fertility signs are plain as day; we simply must know where&mdash;and how&mdash;to look.


<h2><a class="notes" name="what-is-bbt">Basal Body Temperature</a></h2>


Basal body temperature (BBT) is one of two fertility signs that absolutely _must_ be observed in order to practice the sympto-thermal method. It is defined as the core temperature of the body at rest, and is measured first thing upon waking. I'll detail how to measure it in Chapter 8. BBT follows a very predictable&mdash;and scientifically supported&mdash;pattern over a woman's menstrual cycle, although the exact pattern will differ from cycle to cycle and from woman to woman. Measurement of BBT is an important practice when using STM, as it allows a woman to confirm ovulation. This allows her to detect the post-ovulatory infertile period, or the time in her cycle when unprotected sex will not result in a pregnancy. 

BBT is low during the pre-ovulatory stage of the cycle, which includes menstruation, the proliferative phase, and the follicular phase. However, it's important to mention that BBT may be a bit high for the first few days of a new cycle due to lingering effects of progesterone that was produced during the previous cycle. This high menstrual BBT is perfectly normal and does _not_ indicate pregnancy or fertility. 

The low pre-ovulatory BBT can manifest in several ways. For one woman, it may mean temperatures ranging from 97.5 ºF to 97.9 ºF (or from 36.38 ºC to 36.61 ºC); for a different woman, it may mean temperatures between 96.8 ºF and 97.2 ºF (or between 36.00 ºC and 36.22 ºC). It all depends on the woman. 

After ovulation occurs, BBT will rise due to the presence of progesterone that is secreted by the corpus luteum (which, remember, is made from the empty follicle that recently ovulated). The post-ovulatory stage of the cycle, which includes both the luteal phase (ovarian cycle) and the secretory phase (uterine cycle), is defined by a consistently high BBT compared to the pre-ovulatory stage. The woman who had the pre-ovulatory temperatures between 97.5 ºF and 97.9 ºF (or 36.38 ºC and 36.61 ºC) may have post-ovulatory temperatures ranging from 98.2 ºF to 98.6 ºF (or 36.80 ºC to 37.00 ºC). The woman with the lower pre-ovulatory temperatures of 96.8 ºF to 97.2 ºF (or 36.00 ºC to 36.22 ºC) may experience post-ovulatory temperatures between 97.5 ºF and 97.9 ºF (or 36.38 ºC and 36.61 ºC). The important thing to note here is that this sustained rise in BBT will _only_ occur if ovulation has already taken place. This makes detecting the end of the fertile window a breeze! Take a look at the chart on the next page for an example of typical BBT fluctuations seen over the course of a cycle. 


{% include image.html url="/img/book/image2.jpg" description="On cycle day 17, you can see that this woman's BBT spikes and remains high for the rest of the cycle. This is because the corpus luteum secretes progesterone that has a thermal effect, causing BBT to increase. A vertical line is drawn on cycle day 16, or the day before the temperature rise, to highlight the start of the high post-ovulatory temperatures. The horizontal line is called the Coverline, which is drawn to make the temperature spike easier to visualize. I'll discuss how to draw a Coverline in Chapter 7." %}


The data in the chart above shows a luteal phase length of 12 days (this is the number of days between the post-ovulatory temperature shift and the start of the next menstrual period). However, not every woman will experience the same pattern. Luteal phase lengths typically fall between 12 and 16 days and will be quite consistent for each woman [<a class="text-link" target="_blank" href="/book/2014/01/01/notes/#note30">30</a>].

>_My personal luteal phase tends to be exactly 13 days. On rare occasion, it will be 12 or 14 days, but even this small variation makes it easy to predict my next period. Even though my overall cycle length often varies by seven days or more, I always know when to expect my period. Gone are the days spent worrying why my period is already five days later than my last cycle. Gone are the pregnancy scares and the uncertainty!_

A woman trying to _avoid_ a pregnancy will look to her BBT rise to determine when she is no longer at risk of getting pregnant during her current cycle. Conversely, a woman trying to _achieve_ a pregnancy will look to her BBT rise to determine when her window of baby-making opportunity has passed until her next cycle. There are rules that must be followed for STM to be successful, and reading this section alone is not sufficient; for a detailed explanation of the rules of the sympto-thermal method, read Chapter 7 carefully.

It's important to point out that there are certain events&mdash;such as a fever, alcohol consumption the previous night, or restless sleep&mdash;that can cause an artificially high BBT. There are simple ways to pick out these "outlier" temperatures that I'll discuss in Chapter 8. 


<h2><a class="notes" name="what-is-cervical-fluid">Cervical Fluid</a></h2>


Cervical fluid is definitely the most important fertility sign, as it allows for the detection of the _beginning_ of the fertile window. As ovarian follicles develop and secrete increasing amounts of estrogen in the first half of the menstrual cycle, the properties of cervical fluid change to allow sperm to survive in a woman's body. This results in a fertile window of about six days [<a class="text-link" target="_blank" href="/book/2014/01/01/notes/#note31">31</a>,<a class="text-link" target="_blank" href="/book/2014/01/01/notes/#note32">32</a>], though the precise length varies from woman to woman. This fertile window is the _only_ time during a woman's menstrual cycle when a pregnancy is possible. Cervical fluid undergoes several changes during the fertile window as a result of the estrogen rise, each of which I will explain in the paragraphs below. The easiest and most reliable way for a woman to check cervical fluid is to gather some with her fingers; while this might invoke an "ew" or two, checking on a daily basis opens up a whole world of knowledge and insight! I'll get into the details of how to check fluid in Chapter 8, but that little tidbit is necessary to keep in mind as I go through this section. 

I mentioned earlier that the length of the fertile window will be different for every woman, and the same can be said for cervical fluid patterns. A different woman means different hormone fluctuations and, therefore, different fertility patterns! For the sake of simplicity, I will use a 28-day cycle to explain what changes occur. However, this model will serve only as a _guide_ (even for women who do have a 28-day cycle), since each woman will likely find that her individual pattern is different than the one I'm about to discuss. 

###Example Cervical Fluid Pattern

So let's make a completely ridiculous statement and say that every woman has a 28-day menstrual cycle and ovulates exactly on cycle day 14 (which by now we know just isn't true). Day one of the cycle is the first day of menstruation, which typically lasts about five days. On cycle day six, after menstruation has ended, the woman in our example will experience no cervical fluid. This is because estrogen production by the developing follicles has either not begun or it is not significant enough to cause observable changes in her fluid. A woman will still notice a slight dampness on her fingers&mdash;much like the inside of her mouth&mdash;when she checks her fluid...the vagina is a mucous membrane, after all! However, this moistness will evaporate fairly quickly. This "dry" cervical fluid pattern will continue until about cycle day 10, when the developing follicles begin secreting enough estrogen to cause the woman's fluid to develop fertile qualities. 

At this point, cervical fluid will become noticeable, unlike the mysteriously-named "dry" fluid that is nowhere to be found. From cycle day 10 until ovulation on cycle day 14, her fluid will progress from "sticky" to "creamy" to "egg white"&mdash;although this is definitely _not_ the pattern all women will experience. In most cases, the presence of _any_ cervical fluid means the woman is in her fertile phase, since it's possible for sperm to survive in sticky or creamy fluid long enough to fertilize the egg or long enough for egg white fluid to develop. However, there are exceptions that I will discuss in the next chapter. In this example, cycle day 10 will see sticky fluid, which can be white or yellow in color and may have a texture that is thick, pasty, crumbly, tacky, gummy, or rubbery. It may also form small peaks between two fingers, but it will **_not_** be stretchy. The common quality among these different types of sticky fluid is the low water content each one contains. As estrogen levels continue to rise, cervical fluid may become creamy. Creamy fluid is noticeably thinner than sticky fluid&mdash;due to the higher water content&mdash;and may take on a milky or lotiony texture. In our example, this creamy fluid will continue until cycle day 12.

Cycle days 13 and 14 will see a dramatic change in the look and feel of cervical fluid. In the days just before ovulation, the fluid takes on an "egg white" quality, which is appropriately named because it closely resembles raw egg white. The makeup of egg white cervical fluid is similar to that of seminal fluid, allowing for sperm survival and motility in an otherwise hostile vaginal environment. The fluid during these most fertile days may be brown or pink-tinged due to pre-ovulatory spotting. Egg white fluid will be very stretchy and slippery due to the high water content. When I say stretchy, I mean it! This fertile-quality fluid may stretch up to several inches. It's also possible for this fertile fluid to be mixed with sticky or creamy fluid, which is why it's important to check carefully. 

Many women find that the most fertile cervical fluid they encounter during their cycle is the clear (or pink or brown-tinged), stretchy egg white fluid. However, other women may notice that their most fertile fluid becomes so thin, watery, and slippery before ovulation that it won't hold together enough to be stretchy. This fluid is known to leave a lovely circular stain on the underwear and may even leave a woman feeling "leaky" on these days.

After ovulation occurs on cycle day 14 in our example, the fluid pattern can go one of a few ways. While some women notice an immediate disappearance of all fluid, others may find that their fluid reverts back to being sticky for a few days before disappearing entirely. Still, some women might have sticky fluid for the remainder of the cycle. Regardless, the disappearance&mdash;or lessening, depending on the woman&mdash;of fertile cervical fluid coincides with the sudden progesterone secretion by the corpus luteum (and, as it so happens, with the BBT spike) after ovulation. As I mentioned earlier, one of the many ways progesterone prevents a pregnancy from occurring after ovulation is to dry up cervical fluid for the remainder of the cycle. Thanks, progesterone! The chart below shows just one of the possible cervical fluid patterns that might occur during a woman's cycle. Every woman's fertile window will manifest in a slightly different way.


{% include image.html url="/img/book/image3.jpg" description="This woman's fertile window starts on cycle day 10 with the presence of sticky cervical fluid. She is no longer producing fertile-quality fluid on day 15, but cervical fluid alone cannot predict the end of her fertile window." %}


Many women notice that their cervical fluid "types" simply don't seem to fit into one of the categories I just discussed. That doesn't necessarily mean that you're not completely normal and healthy. The most important thing to remember about cervical fluid is that it will become progressively wetter and more slippery leading up to ovulation; so paying close attention to _your_ body's pattern is vital. I will discuss the different fluid types, along with their many possible variations, in more detail when I discuss how to check cervical fluid in Chapter 8.

To visualize cervical fluid changes throughout the cycle, look to Appendix E for a series of images. Individual patterns vary, and the pattern shown in Appendix E is only an example. 


##Cervical Position


While observing cervical position is not _necessary_ to practice STM, it can provide great insight, as well as a way to double-check fertility signs, for women who feel they need a little something extra. The cervix undergoes physical changes in the presence of fluctuating estrogen and progesterone levels. Since the cervix itself produces cervical fluid, it certainly makes sense that changes in cervical fluid also mean changes in the cervix itself. For most of the menstrual cycle, the cervix sits low in the vagina and is very firm, like the tip of your nose. The opening in the cervix, or the os, is tightly closed at this time, indicating that the woman is not yet fertile. As ovulation grows closer, the cervix becomes soft like your lips; its position in the vagina becomes high, and it opens up to allow easier passage of sperm into the uterus. After ovulation, it returns back to its low, firm, and closed position rather quickly and remains in this position until the next cycle. I'll discuss how to check cervical position in Chapter 8. 
